# Harnesses as Self-Improving Infrastructure

A harness is the system that turns model intelligence into product behavior. Formally LLM harnesses are defined as “the code that determines what to store, retrieve and show to the model” (Lee et. All). Harnesses are a less derogatory term for GPT wrappers, but were around 10+ years before GPT2 came out. (https://arxiv.org/html/2603.28052v1#:~:text=Changing%20the%20harness%20around%20a,to%20growing%20interest%20in%20harness)
(https://www.langchain.com/blog/the-anatomy-of-an-agent-harness#:~:text=TLDR%3A%20Agent%20%3D%20Model%20%2B,today%27s%20and%20tomorrow%27s%20agents%20need)

Systems like google search, instagram and Linkedin are harnesses around the recommendations and ranking algorithm. (https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en//pubs/archive/45530.pdf)
The models underneath the harness are split into many different submodels that are specialized in an array of tasks like: encoding a query to an embedding, retrieving results based on the query plus user preferences, reranking those results to prune the downstream computations, stitching together content based on what's most likely to get the users attention, ranking/auctioning the content given the context of what else would be on the page and what makes the system the most money, and generating a full interface given the finalized set of content. These different submodels using the same embeddings, pass the final hidden layer to later models (like a RNN) and have an intricate harness around them so these systems can generate results in under half a second. These harnesses were called infrastructure and teams of hundreds maintained and improved these harnesses that led the product to be faster, higher quality, more personalized, reduced cost to serve and to increase compliance adherence. The underlying models were not available to the public and the harnesses around them were a major part of the MOAT for these systems. OpenAI changed that paradigm by providing frontier intelligence via an API so anyone can build intelligent systems. This sparked broader discussion on the infrastructure around intelligence leading to people coining the term wrapper and now harnessing it to describe it.

 Initial LLM based harnesses that caught my eye were Chat GPT, Perplexity, Cursor. They were carefully crafted by a team of humans to give intelligence an interface for people. It became clear that post training a model around harness significantly improves the quality, latency and efficiency of the application and it gave frontier labs the advantage of the smartest models fitting best with that lab's product . A static harness is effective to train on because: the range of user behaviors is usually well understood, on policy interactions with harness are verifiable and the judge doesn’t need to learn a new harness for every evaluation. We can see this in practice with models like GPT 5.3-codex that outperforms Opus 4.5 on coding related tasks even though Opus was larger and scored better on other benchmarks. They can design a harness according to their understanding of the user and then hammer in the behaviors and tools that allow them to hill climb the benchmarks for their harness.

From an architecture perspective, GPT uses the next token prediction function to learn the patterns across its training examples and relate that to the work presented to it during inference. Harnesses, like codex or claude code, provide LMs a runtime to execute code, tools to retrieve relevant context and other tools to take actions. These harnesses are improved via software updates downstream of the code their engineering teams maintain and by adding new tools, called skills or plugins now. Besides this the harness is fixed and mostly the same for each user using it.
 	
A recent paper about Meta-harnesses (https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.28052) proposes that letting a LLM optimize the harness around the task leads to better performance. By searching over the harness, viewing prior candidate traces and proposing new harness options the outer meta-harness loop, LLM application can improve in quality, token usage and speed. This technique allows us to hill-climb quality metrics by treating the harness as a set of parameters that can be optimized rather than a fixed aspect that changes with a human in the loop. 

Autonomously improving harnesses changes the paradigm of user facing applications from fixed general interfaces with a set of customizations to adapting interfaces personalized for each set of users. Dynamic per user harnesses around LLM’s haven’t been adopted widely yet, but this is the area that Relayer is progressing quickly on. The previous generation of harnesses (google, instagram, etc) is a good starting point for how to use harnesses for personalized recommendations.

Large scale consumer systems allocate the creatives on their application using ML models powered by counts and personalized data. User interactions are used as signals to build a vector representation that proxy that user's preferences. Counts data is the aggregation of user interactions across all the users on a platform and used as a signal for ranking candidates. (https://www.linkedin.com/blog/engineering/feed/engineering-the-next-generation-of-linkedins-feed#:~:text=One%20of%20our%20most%20important,such%20to%20any%20given%20member) At scale and with fast data updates this acts as a proxy for content quality or relevance. Fast data updates is what unlocks search results and timelines to react to real life events and the user preference vector allows your search results or instagram recommendations to “predict” what you want to see. These systems rely on their scale and simple signals like clicks to personalize their application for consumers.

Sufficient data and discrete feedback signals were a requirement that prevented many consumer applications from becoming personalized. LLMs make it possible to get clear insights with orders of magnitude less data, as LLM’s are trained on the sum of all the content in the internet. They also make text feedback from the user viable as an actionable signal. Consumer applications can now use screenshots, videos, text feedback and interaction timelines as the traces that an outer meta-harness loop uses to propose the next version of the harness. User data now becomes the trace signals to improve the harness.

Speed of evolution and a suitable quality function are the biggest challenges in the auto improving interfaces I have been building for Relayer. An overhead of 5+ minutes for the iterating on dynamic harness hurts user engagement. Each iteration requires going through the previous traces using a recursive language model (DSPy.RLM), proposing different evolutions and evaluating them before they get pushed to the user. The quality functions for the dynamic interface to ensure the basic functionality, task completeness, user task velocity, short term task quality and long term task quality. This requires its own article to dive deep into and it has been providing the biggest value gain for the Relayer product so far.

Also here are 2 mocks of auto improving harnesses that I’m working on. They are prototypes for how the Relayer harness will evolve around optimizing the user/users task. 


https://doclayer-one.vercel.app/mocks/ 

https://meta-ide-workspace-mocks-20260513.vercel.app/
